Fayerabend: The Last Savior of Science
Drawing out modern science to its (unwanted) logical conclusion
Ian M Kim
2022
0.2.1
---
## Introduction
Critics of Feyerabend all follow patterns of behavior undeniably similar to each other. No matter which way they turn, a simple
extension of their logic regresses to the beginning of Feyerabend’s
argument. In no other criticism is this more apparent than in Chalmers’
“middle lane” counterargument. When drawn to its conclusions, we see that
Chalmers puts himself in a double bind. If he wishes to end anarchism,
Chalmers must make dogmatic claims which stand at the beginning of
Feyerabend’s normative arguments. Otherwise, Chalmers must succumb to
relativism. This pattern also reveals the importance of remembering,
embodying, and continuing Feyerabend’s cynical and lighthearted criticism
of science. In the face of unreasonable effectiveness, it is entirely too
easy to fall into dogma. We must continually embrace the paradoxical, the
illogical, and the humorous to guard the integrity of science against the
very individuals who claim to support it.

## Epistemological Anarchism
From the opinions of the Vienna circle and the
logical positivists, we find the scientific method beaten and defeated by
the attacks of Popper, Duhem, and Kuhn. First, they took away induction as
an instrument of gaining knowledge, then falsificationism, then even our
theories were deemed incommensurable. By the time Feyerabend launched his
offensive, the groundwork was already laid for the defeat of science.

Feyerabend’s offensive in Against Method is elegant in form and simple in
character. His epistemic argument simply contends that the world is
a complex place. In the face of unfathomable complexity and unknowness, it
simply does not make sense to limit ourselves to a particular method. We
should instead “keep our options open, and we must not restrict ourselves
in advance” (Feyerabend, 20). Additionally, how ignorant would it be to
believe that such a universal method can discover any underlying
mechanisms of nature? In the concise history of science, all proposed
“universal” methods were shown to be useless, inconsistent, and
counter-productive. The only ‘rule’ that survived was “anything goes”
(Feyerabend, 296).

Given science’s presumptive and dogmatic state, the perceived differences
between science and religion get smaller and smaller. How can science
claim higher status when its participants no longer view themselves
skeptically but with the dogma of ‘primitive’ religions (Feyerabend, 301)?
If Feyerabend is correct about the core characteristics of religion and
science, it truly deserves no higher status. Since the American government
values the separation of church and state, there should also be
a separation of science and state. Why teach science as truth over myths
when we do not teach Christianity as truth over Islam? Feyerabend, having
made his epistemic argument, also launches a political offensive. Man’s
flourishing can only be achieved by exploring his own interests, projects,
and activities. However, scientific education in all its dogma compresses
every part of our individuality “like a Chinese lady’s foot” (Feyerabend,
20).

## Methodological Change in Method
Chalmers is very much sympathetic
towards Feyerabend’s campaign, but only insofar as it applies to universal
ahistoric accounts of method. For example, Popper proposed his
falsification schema as a timeless, boundless, universal principle for
making progress in science. According to Popper (and those who have tried
to formulate the method after him), the same standard of falsification
should be applied to vindicate Aristotelian physics as well as modern
quantum mechanics. Chalmers, like Feyerabend, believes that philosophy has
neither the warrant nor resources to make definitive claims about what the
appropriate standards of future sciences should be (Chalmers, 150). As it
appears, no such formulation can stand the test of time.

Chalmers instead proposes an alternative: if science is an open-ended
quest for knowledge, why can’t we adapt and improve our methods and
standards as we learn more (Chalmers, 150). This so-called “middle way”
rejects the existence of a universal method while also rejecting “anything
goes.” The immediate worry, of course, is whether one can successfully
define a methodological change in the method without falling into the same
traps that Popper, Kuhn, and Lakatos have. To stay in the middle, Chalmers
must give some sort of overarching value or standard that methods converge
towards (Chalmers, 150). However, if these overarching values and
standards exist, we have simply bubbled the same problem one level up. In
the context of unfathomable complexity, how can we rely on these
overarching values and standards to guide us the right way? These values
are still just as dogmatic and ignorant as the methods put forth by
previous philosophers. Philosophers of science such as Worrall are
familiar with these criticisms. Nevertheless, Chalmers quickly
demonstrates how changes in method can occur without appealing to
overarching super values.


## Roadmap
In order to refute the viability of Chalmers’ model, I present
the following propositions. First, through Chalmers’ portrayal of Galileo,
we see that no matter what Galileo does, changing the opinions of others
relies on a certain leap of faith that cannot be made logically. Second,
even if Chalmers can establish that no leaps of faith are necessary in
Galileo’s case, he presents no generalizable argument, simply an example
to the contrary (only to face a litany of Feyerabend’s other examples).
Third, given the necessity of leaps of faith, we see that Chalmers’
methodological change in methods is simply a description of anarchism in
hindsight. Therefore, in order to truly argue for the “middle lane,”
Chalmers must become dogmatic.

## The Portrayal of Galileo from Both Sides
Chalmers and Feyerabend propose
two competing depictions of Galileo. To Feyerabend, this poster child of
scientific triumph uses rhetoric and epistemological tricks to exploit
opportunities shamelessly. To Chalmers, Galileo finds common ground with
his opponents and uses simple irrefutable demonstrations to convince and
persuade. The central point of contention lies around the issue of
instruments in science. For Galileo to be taken seriously, he first had to
convince others that telescopes were a valid instrument of science.

Of course, for terrestrial use, it was straightforward to convince people.
Simply point the telescope at a distant object, then travel to the distant
object to check the observation yourself. However, this was impossible for
heavenly objects (Chalmers, 142). Galileo simply could not travel to mars
or venus. We also know how to adjust for specular distortions and other
“tricks” instruments play on our senses because we have access to the very
thing we are observing, but the same cannot be said for heavenly bodies.
So, according to Feyerabend, Galileo resorted to trickery and rhetoric.
Instead of evidence, Galileo used “clever persuasion techniques, because
he wrote in Italian rather than Latin” and appealed to those eager to
accept new ideas (Chalmers, 143). For Feyerabend, circumstances, language,
emotions, and even mystical faith take precedence over an argument’s
rational evaluation, even when they are available. Chalmers paints a very
different picture by suggesting that despite the overwhelming preference
for raw senses, Galileo found common ground and built up his argument from
small irresistible claims to convince his opponents ultimately.

The Aristotelian preference for raw senses dominated the scientific view:
If nature creates everything for a purpose, and if the purpose of man is
to understand nature, then nature surely would not make our senses
inherently unreliable (Chalmers, 151). In order to overturn this standard,
Galileo appealed to irradiation (Chalmers, 152). When bright stars are
viewed against the night sky, objects appear much larger and “festooned
with adventitious and alien rays” similar to how candlelight appears
larger when farther away in the dark. Since Galileo formulated the
appearance of an object as a function of brightness, size, and distance,
he did not have to appeal to telescopic data at all. For example, the
brightness can be reduced by viewing through “a cloud, a black veil,
colored glass… etc.,” to mitigate irradiation (Chalmers, 153). These
formulations can also be directly tested on earth. Simply move a light
source from the subject into the dark, and you can clearly observe the
apparent size change.

Galileo could also extend this principle to heavenly bodies. The apparent
size of Venus, for instance, is much larger during the night against
a dark background than during the daytime (Chalmers, 154). So then Galileo
had a viable argument for the existence of irradiation for both
terrestrial and heavenly objects, which could all plainly be demonstrated.
This, combined with the observation that telescopes decrease irradiation,
provides an excellent foundation for the veracity of telescopic data.
Galileo’s final blow is that telescopic data on the apparent sizes of
Venus and Mars align precisely with the predictions of other competing
astronomical theories at the time.

## Chalmers’ Tricks
Imagine yourself as an opponent of Galileo. Our raw
senses (given that you are not a habitual drunkard) take supremacy over
instruments because nature and God willed it so. This “pessimist” may
accept the phenomenon of irradiation in terrestrial and celestial
contexts. This “pessimist” may also accept that the telescope limits
irradiation in terrestrial contexts. However, these propositions cannot
directly conclude that the telescope provides reliable observational data
for heavenly objects.

 Imagine that you are in a room with a blocked-out window and a virtual
 reality goggle. This headset is a black box; you do not understand how it
 fundamentally operates. However, when you put them on, you see the same
 room. You are given unlimited time to check the correlation between
 headset reality and reality. It appears as though the contents of the
 headset are a virtual replica of the real world and all its dynamics
 except for the window. You see a tree (which still abides by observed
 physics phenomena of the room) when you peer out the blocked-out window
 with the goggles. Of course, one cannot blame this individual for
 accepting the headset data as it pertains to observing objects in the
 room. However, there are no deductively valid reasons to “force” this
 individual to believe that the tree should be real because there is
 a level of unmendable distance between reality and headset content. Is it
 not entirely possible that the underlying algorithm used to represent the
 real world virtually has some flaw that may lead to differences for what
 lies beyond the blocked-out window? Or even that the tree seen from the
 googles is entirely made up? Until we can verify each line of code and
 circuit that compose the headset, we cannot logically trust observations
 gained from it. As long as you cannot ground-up understand the mechanisms
 of the headset, reality and headset-reality will remain separate from
 each other.

Similarly, as long as you cannot ground-up understand atmospheric
dynamics, real appearance of heavenly bodies, and optics, the
telescope-reality will remain separate from reality.  As long as there is
a distance between trusted and untrusted input, what is required is a leap
of faith. Now, I concede that Galileo may have made that leap a tiny one
to take for his peers. Nevertheless, no matter the evidence, he is
condemned to fail in completely bridging the gap. There were no
deductively valid reasons to force individuals to accept telescopic data;
only a leap of faith. Chalmers tries to address this by appealing to
previous theories. If the data on the apparent sizes of Venus and Mars
align precisely with the predictions of competing astronomical theories,
surely telescopic data should be trusted.

Chalmers lacks the big picture. If Galileo proved the veracity of
telescopic data by appealing to alignment with competing astronomical
theories, which he sought to overturn in the first place, that is not
a piece of evidence that Galileo can use either way. Galileo cannot use
the veracity of competing theories (Ptolemaic astronomy)  to justify both
the instrument itself (telescope) and the theory supported by the
instrument (Galilean astronomy), which contradicts the competing theories
used to justify the instrument in the first place. Even in Chalmers’
depiction of Galileo, he uses blatantly fallacious but convincing ‘tricks’
to nudge people off the edge. Hence, we find ourselves back at square one.
At the core of the significant shift to instrumental data was not an
airtight deduction but simply a leap of faith. Galileo brought his
opponents to the edge through logical and fallacious arguments, but the
choice to leap was entirely up to the individuals’ subjective beliefs,
values, and history.

Chalmers also only refutes the protective edge of Feyerabend’s arguments,
not the hardcore. Feyerabend could simply abandon his Galileo example, and
Chalmers would have to face a litany of other examples. Chalmers’
criticisms are not generalizable either. For example, there is no common
ground between the pendulum and falling rock interpretations of pendulums
because they are both correct from the beginning. There is no “venus” to
see in broad daylight. Perhaps one could make a very compelling argument
that one should view the pendulum as a pendulum, but no such argument can
ever force the pendulum view. That leap of faith can only be made
personally and subjectively. So Chalmers pretends to have stripped
arbitrary factors out of scientific persuasion, only to be left with
a core of personal and subjective factors which actually push people off
the edge.

## Chalmers: an Anarchist in Disguise
In the end, the model argued by
Chalmers is not a methodological change in method but simply a description
of methodological anarchism. We must differentiate between methodology at
the personal, discipline, and science levels to understand this criticism.
What Kuhn, Lakatos, and Popper tried to establish is a method at the
discipline or science level: a set of values, standards, and methods that
can be applied to all science at all points in time. On the other hand, we
have personal methods: a set of foundational beliefs such as one's goals,
benchmarks, and rough paths to achieve results held by individual
researchers. Notice that the existence of personal methods is entirely
consistent with Feyerabend’s epistemological anarchism since one’s
individual goals, benchmarks, and postulated paths are all subjectively
determined and can be changed at will by the personal persuasions of the
individual. The individual is free to adapt, modify, and utilize his
method as he sees fit. He does not possess the warrant nor the authority
to lecture others on the benefits of his method that could logically
‘force’ others into belief. Others can only make a certain leap of faith
into it. What we are left with is a stricter epistemological formulation
of the non-aggression-principle: any logically forceful subjugation and
conversion of one’s subjective beliefs is simply not possible.

What Chalmers sees when he talks about the progressive modification of
“any part of the web of aims, methods, standards, theories, and
observational facts” is simply a representation of methodological
anarchism (Chalmers, 157). An anarchist society is not one where all
beliefs lie on a uniform distribution. Like any other metric across any
society, the distribution of personal methods will result in a non-uniform
distribution. The web Chalmers sees is simply the dominant aims, methods,
and standards of personal beliefs held by each researcher. Of course, when
you look at it from a macro perspective, it seems like there are
progressive methodological modifications to method. However, when you
examine deeper, you see that there are only a collection of personal
beliefs, which can only be changed through subjective leaps of faith (no
matter how small the leap is).

Boyle’s mechanical philosophy and its abandonment is a prime example of
Chalmers’ confusion. Boyle’s theory of matter and corpuscles required all
explanations of physical processes to be traced back to the primary motion
of corpuscles (Chalmers, 156).  Having failed to meet these unreasonable
standards, Boyle nevertheless charged forward and performed experiments in
pneumatics and chemistry, which yielded results that stuck around
(Chalmers, 157). Boyle’s mechanical philosophy was his own personal
method, born out of subjective, arbitrary factors and circumstances, which
was abandoned for experimental results due to arbitrary factors and
circumstances. No other scientist was ‘forced’ due to the undeniable
deductive nature of Boye’s philosophy or its revision at any point in
time. How can the example of Boyle’s mechanical philosophy and its
abandonment serve as evidence for an incrementally changing ‘method’ if
only Boyle bought into it in the first place? Mechanical philosophy was
simply Boyle’s method, not the method which later changed.


## Conclusions
Chalmers’ arguments are therefore incomplete. If he only
wishes to make a descriptive claim about the macro-structure of scientific
‘progress’ as a shift in the web of “dominant” aims, methods, and
standards where the underlying force of change is leaps of faith and
subjective belief, then he is in complete agreement with methodological
anarchism. If scientists are allowed to make subjective judgments about
their personal methods without ever being logically forced into changing
their minds, then that is the definition of “anything goes.” If he wishes
to argue against methodological anarchism and truly take the “middle road”
approach, he must make an additional commitment that the ever-changing web
should become every scientists’ aim, method, and standard. However,
Chalmers refuses to make this claim because then we end up back in square
one. Feyerabend’s normative arguments begin with the accusation that
dogmatic scientists foolishly enforce their dogma on everyone else. But
would the method not change under Chalmers’ model? Well, of course, but
the tenets of Catholocism are still dogma despite Pope Francis’ countless
revisions and reinterpretations. Dogma is not purely dogma because it is
immutable, but because people are told to believe in it. Chalmers is
therefore stuck between a rock and a hard place. If he wishes to refute
Feyerabend, he must embody the very thing Feyerabend accuses him of being.
If he does not embody the dogmatic scientist, he has no choice but to
agree with Feyerabend.

Herein lies the beauty of Feyerabend’s work. Feyerabend revels in
paradoxes and contradictions and yields them as his weapons of choice in
the face of serious men stuck in their logic driving themselves into
corners. Of course, Feyerabend argues for methodological anarchism using
logic, but the reader understands (or should understand) that Feyerabend
is ultimately just entertaining himself. It is easy to lose yourself in
science’s unreasonable effectiveness and power. Once you see the marvels
of modern technology, one begins to think, “this is so great; why doesn’t
everybody do this.” In this intoxicating moment, we often forget that
progress is made through expressions of individuality, subjectivity, and
sometimes faiths in witchcraft and nonsense. Humor and unseriousness is
the solution to this intoxication. By being boisterous, provocative, and
contradictory, Feyerabend reminds us that none of this should be taken too
seriously. Seriousness begets dogma, dogma begets indoctrination, and
indoctrination begets compression of individuality which cripples
scientific progress. Paradoxically, by savagely tearing down and doubting
science, we are protecting its hard core from those who claim to preserve
it.

## References
 * Chalmers, A. F. (2013), What Is This Thing Called Science? Fourth Edition. Indianapolis: Hackett.
 * Feyerabend, Paul (1978), Introduction and Chapter 18 from Against Method. London: Verso, pp. 17–22; 295–309.
 * Kuhn, Thomas (1962), “The Nature and Necessity of Scientific Revolutions” and “Revolutions as Changes of World View” in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 92–135.
 * Horgan, John. “Was Philosopher Paul Feyerabend Really Science's ‘Worst Enemy’?” Scientific American Blog Network. Scientific American, October 24, 2016. https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/cross-check/was-philosopher-paul-feyerabend-really-science-s-worst-enemy/.
